---
layout: post
title:      "Skills to Pay The Bills"
date:       2018-09-15 03:14:59 +0000
permalink:  skills_to_pay_the_bills
---


My journey to software engineering has been full of wandering, dead ends, detours, and just about any other roundabout method that you can think of. As a philosophy and political science major, my college degree meant absolutely nothing to prospective employers. I started a career path in Washington, DC politics before realizing that sometimes you don't want to see how the sausage is made (or be the sausage-maker, for that matter). Similarly, I dabbled in some work in the fields of filmmaking and photography unitl I realized that passion and occupation don't always work best together. After some soul searching during an extended peirod abroad, and upon hearing of a close family member's bootcamp experience, I dove into the world of code. In my estimation, code provided an opportunity to utilize some of my creative vision developed while shooting films and photos and collaborative skills honed in the political world. And I still got to "make stuff", which I realized was a desire for me throughout my other job experiences, whether artistic projects or legislative ones. I'd be lying if I said the potential salary bump wasn't also a factor, but I think lots of people have a desire to have a skill that prospective employers regard highly, whether UX design, digital marketing, or software engineering. And the last part of that thought is exactly what sold me on the decision to go headfirst into the coding world without any prior experience. 

Up to this point in my adult life, I'd always looked at my career choice as a traditional "career path". Prove that you have some rudimentary understanding of the job your interested in through a college degree or internship, and then climb the ladder of that industry or company. This is immensely daunting. We put so much pressure on young kids to know what they want to do with the rest of their lives and imply that if they don't make up their minds, they will fall behind. The antidote to this thinking and the potential paralysis it can bring is a skills-based approach to career choices, rather than the path or ladder approach. Coding provides exactly that approach. I began to realize that by learning code, I have an ENORMOUS amount of freedom to do what I want with my work life, along with the security that if a particular path doesn't work out, I can radically shift my direction while remaining valuable to employers. All because I have a skill that translates to many different arenas. I can work as a developer on front-end, back-end, mobile, or desktop applications. I can work in any industry that uses computers for their work, which is practically every single one. I can work at a big company, a start-up, or freelance and be my own boss. And there are mentors and examples of people that have done all of those things for me to follow, no matter which I choose. The security and peace of mind this offers to me after years of searching and anxiously wondering about my "purpose" is breathtaking. 

I am roughly three months into my journey into the world of code and not nearly experienced or knowledgeable enough to tell anyone whether they should pursue it or not. And I do believe that there are those people that have a honest, earnest passion that they should pursue as a vocation with all of their heart. But for anyone else who might be wondering what to do with their lives and feels the pressure of making the "right" choice, I will forever stand by the idea that you should heavily consider thinking about skills first and jobs second. I've made that choice and, for me, there's no looking back.
